[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hey, I'm Ashleigh Sergeant,
and welcome to "Everyday
Enlightenment," your go-to show
that offers practical tips from
expert guests at the
end of every episode,
designed to help you be
more conscious in the midst
of your busy modern life.
We've all noticed how our mental
state and breathing changes
when we exercise or move
our body in some way that
challenges us and maybe
you've also noticed that when
you get anxious, scared,
or angry, that your breath
pattern changes and usually
becomes jagged and unbalanced.
Well, if physical
movement changes
the mind and the breath,
is it also possible
that controlling our
breath can drastically
change the conditioning of
our mind and of our bodies?
Today, my guest is Dr.
Joe Dispenza, a doctor,
a scientist, and a
modern-day mystic
known for sharing
altering discoveries
of quantum science
and the deep teachings
that adepts of
the past dedicated
their entire
lifetimes to master.
Dr. Joe, thanks for
being here today with me.
>> I'm very happy
to be with you.
>> Well I loved reading
in your most recent book,
"Becoming Supernatural," one of
the chapters specifically where
you talk about a breath that
helps us pull the mind out
of the body.
>> Yes.
Well we have a body in our
mind, mapped in the brain,
and we have a mind in our body.
And Descartes kind of separated
the two but there's never
a time where the body
isn't influencing the mind
and there's never time where
the mind isn't influencing body.
In fact, they're
one and the same.
So the majority of
people's thoughts
are connected to
certain feelings
that influence very specific
hormonal centers in the body.
For example, if you
think an angry thought,
you are going to release
certain chemicals that
activate your adrenal system.
You're going to begin to
activate survival systems.
If you feel suffering or if you
feel pain or you feel guilty,
you produce a different
biochemical reaction
that produces different hormone
centers to be activated.
So most people's
thoughts and feelings
are taking most of the
energy of those thoughts
and storing them in
the first three energy
centers of the body.
People call them chakras.
But the first three centers
are centers of survival.
And the procreation,
consumption,
and fight-or-flight is how
most people have survived
the majority of their lives.
In other words,
in survival, it's
not a good time to
open your heart,
so very little
people actually make
the effort to open their heart.
And most of their
thoughts and feelings
are activating
these lower centers,
so the majority of
the body's energy
is stored in these
first three centers.
So then 95% of that
energy stored in the body
has to be liberated and
driven back to the brain.
So we do this breath as a way
to pull the mind out of the body
or send the energy.
And yogis would probably
love this breath
because they have a lot
of conscious control
over the intrinsic
muscles of their body.
So the breath is
about contracting
those intrinsic muscles--
the muscles of the perineum,
the front and back muscles
we use for elimination, the
muscles of our lower abdomen
and our upper abdomen.
When we inhale through our nose
and we squeeze these muscles,
what we're doing is
we're pulling that energy
from those lower centers
up into the brain.
Now when you inhale
normally, when we're just
hanging out and breathing,
when you inhale,
the sutures of your
skull slightly open up
and your bone--
the base of your spine called
your sacrum, that upside down
triangle, actually flexes back.
So when you inhale and
those sutures open up
and your sacrum flexes back,
the spinal fluid drains.
When you exhale, the
sacrum flexes forward
and those sutures close
and it pushes the fluid up.
And so inhaling and exhaling
begins to propagate a wave.
>> So let's go into that for
a moment here because I think
a lot of people in
the Western world,
or definitely in
the modern world,
think that in order to really
make change in our body that we
have to do these big drastic
movements, whether it's yoga,
but big, sweeping,
hard yoga classes,
or fitness or cross fit or
P90X or some of these really
somewhat aggressive forms of
movement tend to be looked
at as the major way to
make physiological--
not just physical,
but physiological
change inside the body.
And just by you
articulating the way
that these really
delicate systems
of the cerebral spinal
fluid and the connection
between the skull
and the sacrum,
that's some pretty
profound effects
that we're talking about
simply by breathing.
That's naturally
happening all the time.
>> Now cerebrospinal fluid
is made of proteins and salts
in solution, and proteins
and salts in solution have
a charge.
When you drop them
in solution, they
have a negative or
positive charge.
So now when you begin
to inhale and you
begin to pull that cerebrospinal
fluid up towards your brain
and you accelerate
those charged molecules,
according to physics, when you
accelerate a charged molecule,
you create an invisible field
called an inductance field.
So now there's information going
from your brain to your body
and from your body to
the brain all the time,
but when you do
this breath and you
start accelerating
those charged molecules,
you create this inductance field
moving in a certain direction.
And all of a sudden, all that
energy from those lower centers
start moving up to the brain.
If you do this properly and
you have a little passion
and you start moving
this fluid, there
will come a moment where the
sympathetic nervous system
will switch on and merge with
the parasympathetic nervous
system.
And when that happens, all of
a sudden, all the energy you
use to make a baby, all the
energy you use to digest
a meal, all the energy you
use in a stress response,
instead of it
being released out,
chemically, it's being
drawn up to the brain.
All that energy goes right
up into the limbic brain
and it hits a gland
called the pineal gland.
And the pineal gland is
a very specific gland
that makes serotonin
and melatonin,
and when that energy strikes
that gland, all of a sudden,
it begins to produce very
powerful metabolites-- system
molecules.
And all of a sudden,
now, the brain
becomes super lucid
and the brainwaves
that we start to measure
are very, very high
gamma brainwave patterns.
Now the person is
super conscious.
Now there's more
energy in the brain.
And when that happens, whatever
is happening between their ears
becomes more real,
and in a sense,
they're having an
orgasm in their brain.
They're going into
a state of ecstasy.
So then you're transmuting
anger, you're transmuting fear,
you're transmuting
guilt or suffering.
>> Do you use pain as well, too?
>> Pain as well.
And so then the liberation of
that energy, all of a sudden,
from this center all the
way to the top of the brain,
begins to create a
powerful polarity--
a positive charge at the
head, a negative charge
at the tail-- and the body
becomes like a magnet.
And all of a sudden,
you start to produce
this invisible
electromagnetic field.
Now the body is
liberating energy.
Now, once the pineal
gland is signaled,
it sends a direct
signal to the pituitary.
The pituitary begins release
two very powerful metabolites
called oxytocin and vasopressin.
Oxytocin signals nitric oxide.
Nitric oxide causes the arteries
in the heart to begin to swell,
and all of a sudden, you feel
an incredible amount of love.
Oxytocin is the love chemical.
When you feel love and
gratitude, all of a sudden,
you're in a state
of receivership.
And then there's a reverse
field that begins to come
in the other direction--
we've measured this--
and that second chemical
is called vasopressin.
And what vasopressin does is it
causes the cells to draw water.
So people with chronic
bladder infections, people
with diverticulitis, people with
food allergies and indigestion,
acid reflux--
>> You have them all
do the same breath.
>> They do the same breath.
And it's just the
liberation of energy.
And once that energy
starts to move
and it starts to travel up to
the brain-- we've measured this
on so many brain
scans, we can actually
predict when it's
going to happen.
>> Have you seen differences
with how quickly this
up-leveling happens when people
actually have this added layer
of intentionality to it, like
you mentioned about having this
intention of making
love to your brain?
Or are you drawing the
energy and the intention
from something else that maybe
you would do with passion
and infusing it
into the practice?
>> Yeah.
We play really, really inspiring
music and we motivate them.
And so when they assign
meaning to what they're
doing-- in other words, when
they inhale and they pull
that energy all the way
up into their brain,
I ask them to hold
their breath and squeeze
those muscles a little bit more.
And when you hold your breath
and squeeze those muscles,
you increase what's called
intrathecal pressure.
And intrathecal
pressure is what you
use when you lift
something up and you
push against your insides.
Well the pineal gland
sits right at the base
of the third ventricle and
inside the pineal gland
are these tiny little
calcium carbonate crystals.
They're stacked rhombohedrans.
They're stacked on
top of each other.
And if you find the
research-- and I've found it--
the pineal gland has been called
a neuroendocrine transducer
with piezoelectric properties.
Now those are just big words,
but piezoelectric effect
is when you take a
mechanical stress
and you apply it
to some crystals
and it begins to produce
an electric charge.
So then the act of inhaling
and bringing that breath all
the way to your brain with
passion and squeezing those
muscles-- and yogis can
do this really well--
and holding your
breath, you're exerting
pressure against that--
>> To the pineal gland.
>> --pineal gland.
And as you start to compress
those stacked crystals,
you begin to produce a
piezoelectric effect.
And now you're taking
a mechanical stress
and you're turning it
into an electrical charge.
Now you're electrically
activating those crystals.
And those crystals are very
sensitive to frequency,
and all of a sudden, when they
become electrically activated,
the pineal gland becomes
like a radio antenna.
And now it can pick
up frequencies faster
than the speed of light.
Now why is that important?
Because your pineal
gland right now
is determining whether there's
enough light in this room,
and if there's enough
light in this room,
it'll make a neurotransmitter
called serotonin.
And serotonin gets
your brain up and awake
and you can function
with conscious awareness.
But when the light
diminishes and there's
an inhibition of
light, serotonin
is transmuted into melatonin.
And melatonin is the
nighttime neurotransmitter.
It helps us to go to sleep.
But serotonin and melatonin
are directly related
to the wavelength
of visible light.
So then we're producing
certain rhythms and chemicals
in our normal waking day,
based on our environment.
But when the pineal gland
becomes electrically activated,
it literally begins to produce a
resonant electromagnetic field.
And now that begins
to send the signal out
and those crystals stretch until
they can't stretch anymore,
and then the field reverses and
it compresses those crystals.
And all of a sudden, you have
a little antenna right up
in your pineal gland,
and now it can pick up
frequencies that are faster
than the wavelength of light.
That's called the quantum.
And all of a sudden,
now, it will pick up
a frequency and transduce--
and a transducer
is like a television.
It takes a frequency and
turns it into a picture.
And all of a sudden, the
person has an inner vision.
And that inner vision is
more real than the world
we're sitting in right now.
And melatonin, then, starts to
turn into some very powerful
chemicals.
One of them-- or two of them are
the most powerful antioxidants
known to man.
Anti-cancer, anti-aging,
anti-heart-disease,
anti-stroke,
anti-neurodegenerative,
anti-inflammatory.
Another chemical is
the same chemical
found in hibernating animals.
>> Hm, interesting.
>> No sex drive, no appetite,
no preoccupation with the outer
world.
The inner world starts
to become more real.
The body moves into stasis.
It's the same chemical
where the caterpillar
becomes the butterfly.
Take the molecule,
tweak it again,
you have a benzodiazepine.
It fits in the same receptors.
What it does is it
suppresses the survival
centers in the brain.
Take the molecule,
tweak it again,
and now you have
the same chemical
found in electric eels-- a very
powerful biophospholuminescent
chemical.
Tweak it one more time and now
you have dimethyltryptamine,
the most powerful
hallucinogenic known to man.
And now the person's
going on a vision.
And that's why it's
called the third eye.
I call it the first eye because
now it's releasing its elixirs
and we start having very
profound dimensional
experiences.
So pulling the mind
out of the body
is beginning to liberate
energy and it begins
to produce a magnetic field--
electromagnetic field-- when
the latent systems switch on,
now we're going to
access information
no longer from our
three-dimensional reality.
We're going to access
that information
from the field and
the brain is going
to begin the transduce
that frequency,
carrying information into
very profound imagery,
and the person's going to have
a full-on sensory experience
without their senses
and it's going
to be more real than the
world we're sitting in.
>> And having had some
pretty visual experiences
in meditation as well, I have
had experiences also that
I've noticed that not everyone's
nervous system is necessarily
always ready for
this kind of charge.
>> Yes.
>> And you mentioned
it earlier on, that OK,
the nervous system really
needs to be able to hold this
charge-- this frequency.
Can you talk a little
bit about that and--
>> Sure.
>> --preparation
people may need?
>> Yeah, I've been knocked
unconscious, I don't know,
maybe hundreds and
hundreds of times.
I see a flash of light,
that energy goes right
into my brain, and wow, it's
the most blissful experience
of my life.
And sometimes I remember,
sometimes I don't, and my body
will do all kinds
of crazy things
because it's information
coming into the body
and it's got to be able
to process that frequency.
So where there's
energetic blocks
or there's a pathway that
it can't move through,
that energy is going to
have its way with the body.
And it's going to cause
the body to do all kinds
of wild and crazy things.
And it's just information.
I mean, our ability--
we really have two choices
when this happens, I mean
from my experience, anyway.
When something unusual
happens-- people always say,
oh, I want the unknown.
I want the unknown.
When the unknown comes, a lot
of people aren't ready for it
because it scares the living
daylights out of them.
You have one of two choices.
In our brain scans,
we've actually seen this.
A person who gets afraid will
move from that elegant state
into a high beta brainwave
state-- a stress state--
and they'll disconnect.
They'll come back to
their body and they'll
lose the experience.
Others, they relax
and surrender into it.
And the more you relax
and surrender into it--
the less you resist it, the
less impedance there is,
the less physiological
conditions we have.
So when it happens, we have to
literally surrender and relax
into it.
And that sounds very easy,
but a lot of times, it's not.
A lot of times,
it's more difficult
than we think because it's
a very powerful frequency.
And the feeling that you have
is a tremendous amount of love
if you can fully
surrender to it.
And it's not chemical,
it's electric,
and you can feel it in every
single cell of your body.
The side effect of that, we've
seen, is a biological upgrade.
We've seen people's
eczema, tumors,
Parkinson's,
rheumatoid arthritis,
Hashimoto's syndrome,
literally go away
after one biological upgrade.
All diseases
lowering of frequency
in an incoherent message, and
you can say, in that moment,
when that latent
system switches on
and those microtubules
start vibrating,
you feel such a level
of coherence and order.
You feel connected
to something greater
that you want to have
that experience again.
And so then the next
time you do that breath,
you have more intention,
you have more passion,
and you're literally drawing
that energy up into your brain
and literally-- one woman said--
her brain scan
was off the chart.
She said, another one of these
and I don't need a husband.
I mean, she had so much
energy in her brain
it was a full on
ecstatic experience.
So people are doing
it and the side effect
is that the body begins
to change dramatically.
>> Super cool.
So can you tell us this breath
or maybe an abridged version
of this breath?
Would you be able to leave
us with a tip of some version
of this breath that people
can try on their own
at home to maybe get a
little flavor of what
we're talking about here?
>> Yeah.
If you could use the same
muscles right now-- contract
the muscles you use for
elimination, front and back,
and you were to lift
those muscles up,
you would be lifting up your
pelvic floor, your perineum.
Those are the
muscles we're going
to use to contract the energy
related to the first center.
If you were to pull your
abdomen in and touch your belly
button to your spine,
you would be contracting
the second center,
where you would
begin to milk the energy
out of the second center.
If you contract
your upper abdomen,
now you're contracting
the muscles that
are related to that center.
The act of inhaling
through your nose
while you contract
those muscles,
coupling those together, is
the act of pulling that energy.
Where do we want it to go?
Right to the top of our head.
So if you took
your finger and you
were to place it on
the top of your head
and work your
finger now in there
and then take your
finger away, if you
can keep your attention there,
where you place your attention
is where you place your energy.
So that's your target.
So the idea, then,
is to close your eyes
and to inhale, and at the exact
same time that you inhale,
to lift those muscles up and in,
with the intention of pulling
the mind out of the body
and liberating energy
and pulling that energy all
the way up into your brain.
As you inhale, one,
slow, steady breath.
Follow it from your perineum
through your lower abdomen
through your upper
abdomen through your chest
through your throat
through the brain all
the way to the top of
your head, and when
you get to the top of your
head, hold your breath
and now squeeze those
muscles a little bit more
and just pump that fluid up
against the back of your brain
and hold it.
And then you exhale,
relax, and feel.
Now, in the beginning,
when you learn anything,
you have to practice
it and it's mechanical.
But as you keep
practicing, it will
become more intuitive
and less step by step.
It will become one motion.
So the act is inhale.
At the same time, perineum,
lower abdomen, upper abdomen.
And as you inhale,
you follow that breath
all the way up through your
chest, through your throat,
keep inhaling through your
brain to the top of your head.
When you get to the
top of your head,
drop your shoulders down,
straighten your spine,
squeeze those muscles
a little bit more.
Put your attention on
the top of your head
and just push that
fluid a little bit,
compressing the crystals
of the pineal gland.
Hold for a few seconds
and then relax and feel it
in your brain.
Now I would recommend when you
do this to play some music that
has no lyrics but
has some drums or it
has some music that
you can interpret
as the movement of energy.
If the energy strikes your
brain, don't be afraid of it.
It's just the
liberation of energy.
Let it happen.
Take a moment, keep your
eyes closed, and do it again.
I would recommend 5
minutes in the beginning
and work your way up to 10.
Usually, people
who do it properly
have a very significant amount
of energy in their brain.
We now know that this breath
creates more brain coherence,
it increases the amount
of energy in the brain,
it activates the
autonomic nervous system,
and our brain scans show that
it stimulates the pineal gland.
And those are all
the important things
to have a mystical experience.
>> Well thank you so
much for sharing that.
That is--
>> That's a lot of content.
>> It's a lot of information
and the disclaimer as well.
>> Yeah.
>> Because it takes work
and energy awakenings--
in the yoga tradition, they may
call them Kundalini awakenings
or Kundalini experiences, or
just the new movement of energy
can be really frightening to
people and can also sometimes
be discouraging if people
are feeling like they're not
getting it right away.
I'd say stick with it.
It sounds like you're
saying that as well.
And train yourself into it.
>> Yeah, it's a skill.
You just practice it.
And just like anything else,
you start off like snowboarding.
You've got to lose a lot of
muscles in the beginning,
and then when you
figure it out, it just
starts to get really easy.
And it's the same
thing with this.
You've just got to stick
with it and keep practicing.
>> Great.
Well thank you so
much for sharing that
and for being here
with me today.
I look forward to having
this conversation continue
sometime soon.
>> Thank you so much.
>> And thanks so much
for joining us today.
I'll see you next time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]